Hello.
Good afternoon, Minister.
Good afternoon.
Is it possible to get some water, please?
Absolutely.
Okay.
Thanks. Afternoon.
Yeah. No problem. So we're starting with Whaikaha?
Yes.
Great.
I think we're just rolling through for an hour, so however long she took-
Yep
... come up.
So we will-
That's how we want it
... we will break in between.
Yeah.
And then the Whaikaha team will leave and DSS will come up.
Okay. I don't think we-
Have you explained what they're doing?
There's no structure-
I think-- No. We were just
doing Vote Disabled People and Vote DSS.
Sorry, say that again.
We were just doing an hour for Vote Disabled People and Vote DSS.
Yeah, but there's two separate organizations.
So we were doing-
Okay. If-
... 20 minutes with Whaikaha and 40 minutes with DSS.
Uh.
Or we can do 30 and 30.
They're completely different areas of work.
Yeah. Well, we didn't split it up as a committee-
Yeah
... but we'll
work our way through. Questions come up, we'll handle.
Well, just some of the team can't.
So sorry, which one are we-
Some of the team can't stay, though-
Oh
... for the whole hour.
Okay.
Right. Well, we-
Can you just clarify that for us? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. I'm confused, to be honest. Um-
Yeah.
My understanding...
So
may
I
come
from the time that's taken?
Would you like a point of order before-
Sorry?
I'll raise a point of order if the minister's remarks go over
time.
Well, you can do that, and I don't need to take that out.
Oh, oh. I have standing orders to prove it.
Great.
Oh, great way to start.
Good way of wasting time anyway.
Yeah.
Uh, please start, Minister.
Okay. Well, hello again, everyone. Uh, nice to see you.
Um, today from the Ministry of Disabled People, Whaikaha, is the
Secretary for Disabled People and Chief Executive, or Tesorero,
um, and there's a number of other members of the leadership team.
Uh, we are now into the second year of the vote, established on the 1st of December
'24,
uh, which is the day that we established the standalone Ministry of Disabled
People. After a busy first year in delivering important
foundational work such as the New Zealand Disability Strategy refresh,
I'm pleased to see the ministry shifting to focus firmly on impact and
implementation. To achieve this, the government has allocated
$21 million per annum to improving the lives of disabled
people,
separated into two amounts, just over 19 million departmental
expenditure for system-level leadership, strategic policy advice, and
stewardship.
This also includes supporting government relationships with the disability
community and coordinating the government's alternate formats
accessibility work.
One point, just nearly seven million on non-departmental
expenditure for disabled community development and capacity building,
including grants.
We know that disabled people face challenges across many areas, including
education, health, housing, and justice.
There are unfortunately many stark examples, but one statistic that stands
out that we must change is the unemployment gap between disabled and
non-disabled people.
Labor force participation for disabled people is only 27%,
compared with 73 for non-disabled people.
And we know that most disabled people out of work want to be
working. So this is both a huge opportunity and a challenge.
That is where the work of the ministry can make a real difference, and I was
pleased to see the first action from the New Zealand Disability Strategy
recently delivered. Um, it aims to address this gap.
With one in six New Zealanders being disabled, improving outcomes is critical to
making New Zealand a better place to live.
The ministry is clearly focused on driving changes across government and our
society,
whether pushing for better accessibility or ensuring that New Zealand Sign
Language thrives.
It was important
for our government to refocus the Ministry of Disabled People for deeper and
broader impacts across society. And at the same time, I'm
ensuring that every part of government plays its role in supporting
increased agency, independence, and outcomes for disabled
people. This is everyone's responsibility, and we all benefit from
it. I'm happy to take questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I haven't got any bids open. Um, very good.
Thank you. Um,
Minister, you have reduced the vote of, uh, the Ministry for
Disabled People, for Whaikaha, and arguably, as disabled people
have said, reduced their voice in this government.
Um, what is your ministry doing? And yet the whole, uh,
title of the vote is to improve the lives of disabled people.
What are you doing to, um, support them through the cost of living
crisis?
So, um, the vote, obviously, with the separation of DSS-
Yes
... um, is similar.
Um, DSS-- Uh, sorry. Whaikaha will be no different in terms of other government
agencies, in terms of the requirement for the 2% savings.
Sorry, could you speak into the mic, please? We can't actually hear you.
Or speak up.
I can hear.
Sure.
I can't. No, the-
Um-
... minister can't
... government agencies have been asked for the 2%, uh, reduction, um, and
Whaikaha-
Mm-hmm
... is not exempt from that. Uh, in terms of
the fuel challenge, um, like many
areas, uh, we have seen the independent work- independent,
um, tax credit for working families, um, with
children. Um, 1st of April, we saw the AGA
increases, uh, as well as inter- Winter Energy Payment increases.
Um, and what we are-- have done is also lifted the, um, in between
Travel payments, um, for carers, um, because we know that that is
a significant cost, and we were quick to respond when we got
feedback that that was, uh, creating a challenge.
What we do know is that, um, and we've learnt from the Royal
Commission into the COVID, um, response, is
that any response to a crisis must be temporary,
targeted and timely. Um, because what we do know
is significant amounts of excessive spending in a period like that
directly inflate, um--
has an impact on inflation, uh, which we know, uh, will
have a significant impact, and I believe a disproportionate impact on
disabled people.
So with the 2% cut to Whaikaha, what
will stop? What work stops as a result of that, or what roles
will be disestablished?
I'll pass to Paula to, uh, talk you through that.
So, as the minister said, Whaikaha is not exempt from the 2%
reduction, and we are currently working
through how we will achieve those savings,
and that's done as part of our performance plan, which all
agencies are doing. Our performance plan is due with the
minister at the end of July, and then Cabinet will make decisions
after that. So, at this stage, uh, I'm not able to talk about the
detail of our thinking, um, because ministers are yet to see
the information.
Um, my final sup on this line of questioning.
Given that Whaikaha's, um,
reduced role is now limited to the disability strategy-
No, that's not correct
... um, and-
That's not correct.
Okay. That's your, that's your view.
I disagree. Um-
Well, what are you based it on?
With the disability strategy-
What are you based your-- what do you base that assumption on?
Because what is the stewardship across transport?
Why do you allow a cut to total mobility?
Mm-hmm.
Why do you allow increased reviews and assessments for disabled
people? Um, why has your government made the
targets for accessible housing through Kainga Ora voluntary-
Great. Let me answer those questions for you
... rather than a mandatory system?
So-
If you'd like answers, I'm more than happy to address them
... sure. I mean, disabled people do not report an
increased or improved, um, quality of life as a
result of decisions your government has made.
So talk us through the strategy priority areas at least.
Great.
Wait, wait, wait. Um, this, this-
Employment is about three times
... Pri- Pri- Prianka.
Sorry. So how many-
Excuse me, Prianka
... how many questions are we asking here?
Prianka-
I'm gonna focus on housing and employment.
I'm, I'm happy to address them
... Prianka, you, you've raised some issues here that need, need, uh-
Yeah
... give the minister a chance to answer as well.
Great. So, so where are you, where are you starting with?
Education-
Start with housing
... or housing?
What-
Right
... with the Kainga Ora targets, what are you doing to improve accessibility?
Great. So, um, the,
uh, review of social housing, uh, that Minister Bishop announced a
few weeks ago is very much based on the challenge at the moment
that disabled people often have the most significant need around social
housing. Uh, and actually, they don't get the
support they need. So what we want to ensure with the review
of social housing is that it is based on
access rather than affordability.
Um, and we've been very clear about the needs of disabled people in
instigating that review. It'll be a three to five-year work
program, but what we do know is, um, well,
it's a long-term challenge that has existed for
decades. Uh, and I'd be surprised if that member thought
that disabled people and their needs for social housing have
been met any time in the past. Which is why we must
take a long-term considered view in fixing the
problem. In terms of-
I asked for the targets, Minister. Could you speak to the targets please?
So in terms of the targets-
Mm-hmm
... yes. We are very clear about the fact that,
um, accessible housing is important for, um,
disabled New Zealanders, which is why housing is one of the five
key areas in the strategy. So it's
not just about state housing. We want to ensure that the private
sector is leaning to the party in terms of ensuring that
they can also meet the needs of disabled New Zealanders.
We can't rely just on the state housing sector to provide-
Is there a target or not?
I, I'll just-- can I-- Prianka, can I just remind you that questions are through-
The minister's not answering my questions
... can I remind you that questions are through the Chair? Have some respect.
Wow.
Mr Chair, can you ask the minister to answer my question?
No, you can ask your question.
Thank you.
But-
So does Kainga Ora-- so I take your point that there needs to be work in the
private sector as well.
Yep.
Don't disagree.
But of course, the government has levers into its own housing program.
So does Kainga Ora have a mandatory target for accessible new
builds?
It doesn't at the moment.
Mm. Thank you.
There are two foundational actions in the strategy around
housing.
Mm-hmm.
Um, firstly, clear definitions of accessible housing, 'cause that
has been a problem in the past.
Yep.
There's no point in having a target for accessible housing if the accessibility
definition is not well deployed. So that is the first one.
Um, and there is also work to collect data on regional
housing needs to identify where the gaps are.
So, uh, that is a really important piece of work in the housing
strategy. Uh, and that is why we are progressing
that work.
Supplementary, Helen.
Um, I wanna ask about the, um, temporary
targeted relief.
Um, first of all, you talked about the taxi or the rates of, for per
mileage for care workers and how you'd adjusted them.
We get mileage rates which are 1.20 to 1.30 if
you're on dis- diesel or petrol.
Um, these workers I understand get 82 cents.
They're making short journeys because they're going from hub to hub.
Often, we're making longer journeys, and so we're
collecting quite a lot in those, um, amounts.
Why would you have a different amount for a care worker who's
doing- Pretty important on-the-ground stuff, and is on a
really low wage. Why would you do that versus
us?
Well, what's in my responsibility as the Minister for Disability,
of disability issues, is looking at support
that either disabled people or their carers require, which
is why when we have looked at the fuel pressure and the pressure
of increased fuel prices, that was one area that we have
addressed very directly.
Is it sufficient in future? Well, that's a very different question.
How does it compare with others? That's a very different question.
My focus has been on ensuring that carers are
able to pay for petrol to be able to get in between
jobs to provide consistent and important care for disabled New Zealanders.
Isn't that one of the issues, though?
We're here for creating a just society, and
temporary and targeted seems to mean what we can get
away with in a short-term way, but
actually, long-term, we look after ourselves much better.
Well, I refute that. This is a response to the current
fuel crisis, which has seen fuel prices go up.
We're unsure for how long those fuel prices will remain
as high as they are at the moment. But it was very practical,
sensible changes to support where it was required
for in between travel.
Can I-
I need to go to supplementary card.
Okay.
Thank you. A supplementary on this.
I just want to focus in on this because it is the
carers who are out there and looking after our disabled
people and providing that face-to-face care, which
is so important. So when
you brought in the
temporary fuel
increases for carers,
did you consider
that any of the casework where those people are still paying
out of pocket? So we've got reports that carers are still paying out of
pocket for going between caregiving, even
with the
temporary increase. So when was that forecasting done
for the amount that you've put into the temporary
amount?
So it was a response to the fuel crisis and higher
fuel costs that carers would face.
Just as across the board,
increased fuel prices puts pressure on many, many, many New
Zealanders.
We
weren't aiming to solve every problem, but to alleviate some
of the cost pressures, which is what we did with that measure.
Thanks. So
are you concerned that there are carers who are
paying out of their own pockets for traveling between
jobs? Because the-
I've not had that concern raised with me directly.
Okay.
What we did do, because we looked at what the groups of workers were
who were traveling in between,
and that's where the support was provided very directly.
Is there a review happening?
It was temporary, and based on the fuel
prices being at a certain level.
New question, Maureen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Minister, you mentioned in your opening remarks around employment opportunities
for disabled people. I'd be really keen to know,
based on previous or historic programs that
were run, I think the pilot was run in Christchurch,
targeting employers to take on disabled
people. Can you let us know, are there any plans
to replicate that?
Yeah. So the first action that we completed in the New Zealand Disability
Strategy was the launch of One in Six,
which we launched here in Wellington with the Wellington Chamber or Business
Central.
And that is all about how do we provide
tools and information to give more employers confidence
in employing disabled people. And when we launched it,
we had feedback from employers, but also from
disabled people, and one of them
had autism.
And I think often the view is there's a bit
of an unknown space of how to support
employees with disabilities.
And by making it easier, and really providing practical
information about what they might need to do or adjust,
we're very confident that that will support more disabled people
into employment. And the feedback we've had so far has been
really positive. That's been rolled out across the country,
so it's not just in Wellington.
Is there anything you want to add to that, Laura?
Thanks, Minister. I can add some additional work that we've been doing
in the employment space to support the government's goals.
So on top of the One in Six website that the minister talked about, we also
ran, this summer for the first time, an all-of-government
internship program where we had 10 government agencies
participating. We put 13 interns through, and six of them have
gone into full-time work as a result of that, and we've
just agreed to do that internship again this year.
We've also been working really closely
with the Public Service Commission and other government agencies around
supporting
a greater experience and number of disabled public
servants. So we're doing that through updating our toolkit for
agencies to support them with that.
Another key important piece of work is what we know through the work in
developing the New Zealand Disability Strategy is that the
pathway between education and employment opportunities and that transition
period is often where things can fall down for a number
of people, including disabled people.
And so we've just commissioned some research to do a much deeper dive on that-
journey, those pathways, so that we can
provide advice on what to do about that.
And that was one of the actions coming out of a disability strategy.
Just finally, one other key piece of work that we are leading as
an agency in this strategy is the national awareness and
capability building. Because what we know is that actually most employers really
want to do the right thing and try to do the right thing.
But we know through our work on the strategy and subsequent work that they do
want further information and toolkits, and we also know that attitudes and
awareness play a big role. So we've just launched work
to build that awareness program to support employers.
Thank you.
That's all.
So Whaikaha
has been split,
so the disability support services is no longer under Whaikaha
and is now a monitoring
of outcomes role and advocacy role, which you've sort of
outlined there.
So with the 27% of disabled people who are
employed, does that include disabled people who are paid under
the minimum wage? And this is a question for both the minister and for
Whaikaha. What advocacy is Whaikaha
doing to make sure that disabled people are being paid at least a
minimum wage, and does that
27% include them? Because, of course, we had the
benefit, the top-up taken away
for disabled people from agencies, people that were
paying them a minimum wage with the top-up
that was previously happening. So the question, I guess
the question is, sorry, I'm getting-
No, I'm clear of your question.
Yeah. Okay, great.
I'm just asking if we know if the business enterprises are included in that figure
or not.
I'm not sure if double-
No. We'd have to look into that.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. Well, I think we'll conclude it there.
Great.
I want to thank you, Minister, and Paula, Ben, Rebecca, Jenny, Renel,
and everyone. Thank you for your time this afternoon.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Jane.
Thank you, translators.
We'll now shift to your second role in DSS.
Yes. I will.
Oh.
The
other
page. Oh, I get confused because you're all-- they've given
it all one time.
All right. Well, welcome again, Minister.
With your budget for these services hat on, and this is the
much more substantive one in terms of the funding allocation, obviously, with
$2.943 billion in 2026,
'27. But-
Great
... I'll invite you to make opening comments and-
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm joined by Anne Shaw,
who is the Deputy Chief Executive of DSS, and
Mr. Hill to my right, who is the General Manager of DSS
Transformation, and Justine Cornwall, who is the General Manager of Policy at
DSS.
And my apologies, Laura, I should've acknowledged you in the
previous session. And I just would say,
if we can not have two people speaking at once, it does make
it a lot easier for our interpreter.
DSS is a core part of my wider disability issues portfolio.
Funding provides 55,000 disabled people and their whanau
access to a wide range of supports and services,
100,000 access environmental support services,
including equipment and modification services,
and 26,000 disabled children access the child
development services so they can reach their developmental milestones.
We, of course, have prioritized investment in DSS with record
investments of $2.1 billion in investment in budgets
'24 and '25.
And this year, the DSS appropriation stands at $2.9
billion, which is the largest annual appropriation for DSS
to date.
It means that there is more funding available to support disabled people who are
eligible for services.
And in the past two years, DSS has focused on stabilizing actions to make the
system fair, transparent, consistent, and
sustainable. DSS now has stronger fiscal management
and is operating within its baseline.
The voice of the disability community has and will continue to inform
changes at DSS. There has been significant engagement
and consultation to inform our work.
The changes to assessment, allocation, and flexible funding introduced earlier this
year were all directly informed by feedback from thousands of
members of the disability community.
I want to acknowledge DSS's contracted providers, NASCS,
and the Enabling Good Life sites who have supported these changes, and I
recognize it has been a significant period of change, and I'm appreciative of
their support and patience as we've worked through it.
DSS plays a vital role in people's lives, but it has been operating
without a clear legislative foundation.
That's why last month I introduced the DSS bill.
It sets a clear framework that reflects the way DSS
already works. It defines the purpose of DSS,
clarifies its functions, and sets out how public funding can
be used. It will make DSS more
consistent. The bill builds on the work to stabilize
DSS and the feedback received from the community in response to that
work. It was always planned as part of strengthening DSS.
Responding to the Supreme Court's decision in December '25, which found two
people were paid to provide care to a family member who were employees of
the state, has been a necessary and important component of it.
To be clear, the bill does not impact
anyone's current funding allocation or support package.
It does not change any DSS eligibility setting.
It does not introduce income or asset testing
where it is not currently used. And I can confirm for the record,
there are no plans to extend its use.
I'd like to acknowledge the Select Committee for its support to progress
the bill through Parliament.
Previous consultations highlighted challenges around support for
carers, and so DSS has accelerated work here by
introducing a more consistent assessment approach that, for the first
time ever, considers carers' needs.
DSS is also developing a carer support package
covering payments, improved respite, and practical support
for family carers.
Earlier this month, I announced a further round of community consultation.
The consultation is focused on practical improvements to areas
which the disability community have told us matters most to them,
like the easier navigation of services.
My priority is making sure that we are fixing the basics of disability
support and, of course, building a sustainable future that disabled
people, their families, and carers can rely on. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much, Minister. First question, Priyanka.
Thank you.
Minister, since your government took
office, we've seen a whole raft of changes to control
spend or the fiscal cost to the Crown in this
appropriation.
We've also seen, effectively, a pause to flexible
funding that did limit access to a number of services.
My understanding, and I'd like some clarity around the figures, is
that there have been a couple of underspend transfers, expense transfers.
About 191 million transferred,
I think, from the '24, '25 year to this year, and then
176 transferred from the previous year to this one,
plus 200 million that's been returned to the center.
Can you confirm that those are underspends
and transfers?
Yeah. So obviously the focus of this hearing is the
estimates going forward. So yes, there was an underspend that
has been transferred forward.
One of both the challenges and opportunities of the significant
program of work that's been underway is,
first in the stabilizing phase, making sure that we had line
of sight about what funds would be required
going forward.
Mm.
So in budget '24, there was the increase
of $1.1 billion, and then
between budget '24 and budget '25,
there was a much better understanding of what the future costs
would be, both in terms of increasing
spend and allocations for NASCs.
So I think last year they got a 14% uplift.
This year is a 10% increase.
So budget '25, we had the confidence to add
another billion dollars, because we could see where the
increased need would be, where the increased cost would be, and also
allow for growth.
Part of what we were also looking at was what were the costs
required
to be able to undertake the level of change.
And as I said, it's been significant.
So some of it has been just purely around phasing,
what work was done when.
But we're in a much stronger position now, which is
why we call this phase strengthening.
And why, in the changes that were announced in September
last year that came into effect this year, we had the
confidence to say we would, in terms of flexible
funding, they would be held at the allocation that people had.
And in addition to that,
there would be no guidelines. There would be no
rules.
And on top of that, we were also able to then consider, for the first
time ever, the needs of carers.
So we're in a much stronger position now with very
strong line of sight about what the costs will be going forward-
Two more seconds
... in addition to being able to do both an uplift
for residential contracts, an increase of 40%
for NASCs last year, and 10% for NASCs this
year. So we're in a strong position, and our strengthening work
will continue.
So over that two year period, or roughly two year
period,
different
organizations, disability organizations, have
provided
qualitative
information, I guess,
evidence
around the impact of those changes on the lives of disabled
people. And the trauma that they
were subjected to when flexible funding was paused.
Has the government done any quantitative
research? Do you have any figures of the number of
people who were not able to access the supports that they were
eligible for before the March 18th changes that
has now led to these underspends?
Alice, do you have any information on that?
What we do know is that, particularly in flexible
funding, as you mentioned, people weren't able to access services that they
otherwise might have. We did some analysis to understand
Where that was impacting most. We've heard very clearly from community and
under-serviced regions of the country, particularly Taitokerau,
where there aren't contracted services and the reliance on flexible funding is
greater. Particularly also people not being able to access carer
support. The previous purchasing guidelines had placed limitations on what they
could reasonably do to access sustainable care.
And so now we are starting to see, since the April changes and the return of
flexible funding, an increase in the utilization of flexible funding, particularly
carer support again. And as the minister mentioned, the carer
component of the new needs assessment approach means that we've got
a better view of individual support needs,
and the support networks that they have around.
So then,
I guess this is kind of a
follow-up to that, but also a question to you, Minister.
Will you make that research analysis public so that people
can see what disabled people went without during the
two-year period? And then can you give us information,
Minister,
on the budget lines that have led to the two
lots of underspend. Where was that underspend from?
So firstly, just let me back up a bit.
I made the comment that there's been a significant amount of change over the last
two years.
Mm-hmm.
And as I've said in my previous
appearances before this committee,
it was incredibly difficult and frustrating and challenging for
disabled people during that period of time.
Unfortunately,
we needed to get on top of spending that was out of
control.
And I
know and I've heard and I've met with disabled people and their
families
and heard how incredibly difficult it was.
And I apologize for that. What I won't
apologize for is the need for us as a government
to get on top of the spending that was out of control,
to now have put in place really sensible measures,
including the residential contracts.
And I think one of the things that disabled people called for
consistently during that time was an
assessment that is now used across New Zealand.
So no matter where you are in New Zealand, you are assessed on the same
criteria. There is greater transparency around the
allocation of support that a disabled person can access.
And we've gone further than that
in terms of building in part of that assessment for
carers. In terms of your question around the
detail of the underspends and the carry forwards,
happy to provide that to you.
Thank you.
Supplementary, Caroline.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's in a small
place, sorry.
Last page.
I'm sorry.
It's okay. Just take a minute.
With--
Just took my brain into another thing but I think it's okay.
While you think about it-
Thank you so much
... I might ask a supplementary. Can I just clarify, Minister, so if I understood
you correctly, last year in Budget 2025, there was a $1
billion increase in fund.
Increase.
There was a $1 billion increase in funding for disabled support services.
Yes.
And in Budget 2026, the year we're now looking at, looking ahead,
there's been a $373 million increase.
Yeah. So the total budget
this year is 2.9.
Part of that is around the transfers and carry forwards.
Next year will be 2.73.
And I'm happy to provide the details of why those
transfers and carry forwards have occurred.
What we do know now, so the 1.1 billion in budget '24, the one
billion in budget '25,
we now have a much clearer view
of what the requirement for funding will be going
forward, both in terms of increases,
because we know there'll be a requirement for increases on an annual basis,
as well as the fact that there will be a growing need.
As the population of disabled people increases, there will be
a need. But two years ago, we had
zero visibility of any of that. Didn't know why
the costs were blowing out, where, how,
what the numbers were. And anyone would
expect that a government agency has line of sight as to
what they're spending money on, what the performance is
of the contracts that are delivering those services to New
Zealanders.
And that's why I
was confident that we didn't need to seek additional funding
in Budget '26. Does that mean there won't be a
need for additional funding in Budget '27?
I'm not guaranteeing that.
Because we expect there will be a growing need.
But at least now it is manageable, visible, and transparent.
Supplementary, Maureen.
Thank you,
Mr. Chair. It was actually a supplementary to Priyanca's question, if that's all
right.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, this is all supplementary so far.
Oh, okay.
So, following on from Priyanca's line of questioning
about the funding. So our understanding, my understanding,
is that over many years
it's relied on supplementary estimates to top up the budget.
Absolutely.
But
now that the purchasing guidelines have been removed-
Does that run a risk that some people will
overspend their budget too early, or some people may not
spend that money appropriately? And so how do you have oversight of
that?
Yep, great question. So,
you may remember
that when we first
announced that we would be
removing the
flexible funding guidelines in their entirety,
that there was a suggestion that we would hold the allocation at
what people had used previously,
and that was an interim step for us to have
certainty about spend going forward.
When we got closer to that point,
because the way the assessment works now, and it is uniform across
the country,
the NASCs or the EGL will basically create a
plan with the disabled person and their family, and
that plan is what drives the level of flexible funding,
for example, that they have.
We are allowing that person to spend their flexible
funding according to their plan,
and we are trusting them to do that.
So part of the deal, the rights and responsibilities of having
no guidelines around flexible funding was you manage your budget.
And of course, there are organizations or supports to help disabled
people to do that if they need it.
But it basically means if somebody gets to 10 months out of the 12 and they've
spent their budget, that's on them.
So-
That's on them. So that was the
quid pro quo of having no guidelines at all.
Can I just-
Sure
... just-
And sorry, and I should say, when
we launched it on the 1st of February,
we removed that
limit on what they had previously spent, and now it is based on their
allocation.
So just a quick sup on that too.
Sure.
So I did ask about the risk that the funding would
be spent to the benefit of the disabled person.
I guess if I'm going to be crude about it, the question is: how do we
know that carers aren't going to just go down the pub and spend and blow the lot
and the person who the funding is targeting-
Yeah
... does not get the benefit of it?
Yeah. So we trust
disabled people and their carers when they do that needs
assessment and come up with a plan, that they're clear about what
that plan entails and how to use it.
And there's a few things that are off the limits.
You can't gamble. You can't use drugs or
tobacco, and alcohol, I think, is off the list as well.
But look, we wanted to provide maximum flexibility if it's within the plan
because what we recognize and what we've heard very clearly through all of the
consultation
with disabled people and their whanau is they want choice and
control.
Okay.
And what works for a disabled person in Kaitaia
is going to be very different for a disabled person in Auckland
Central.
And so that's where flexible funding really comes
into its own.
And the plan,
the initial plan
based on their needs and
the key is because it's consistent. Right?
So you won't have a very different
assessment of need and support
in different parts of the country.
Okay.
But we are trusting people to use that funding
appropriately. There are through organizations
who support them in doing their personal budgets and using their
flexible funding. There are some checks and balances.
So for example, a provider could then say, "Do you
realize that you're at month six and you're
70% of your flexible funding for the
year?" So,
there is support available. We're not just saying,
"Here's the assessment, here's the plan.
Knock yourself out." That would be inappropriate.
We are providing support where it's needed.
Supplementary, Caroline.
Thank you.
Thank you for saying that you'll give us a breakdown of where
that 200 million underspend came from.
But just a question for the officials or yourself, Minister.
Do you know if any of the underspend came from programs that were
planned and weren't delivered?
Yes.
Thank you. I can answer that. No, they didn't.
All of the underspends were one-off funding available that hadn't been
allocated, and we know that NASC didn't need to allocate that as they were
all well underspent. So they had plenty of money if people were
assessed as needing funding, whether it was through flexible funding or through
home and care providers or respite to access that funding.
It's largely funding that wasn't used within the year or
allocated to an individual, which means that actually, because it is
one-off funding, we can't allocate it towards packages for the future,
because otherwise we'd be then saying, "Stop and start.
You've got money now, but you won't have it in the future." And that's the last
thing that we wanted to do. We want certainty for disabled New
Zealanders that the money that has been allocated to them, they can use for their
needs.
So I think an important context there is that
before Budget '24, NASCs didn't have budgets.
Mm-hmm.
So they didn't have budgets at all.
So there was no visibility on what it was
that they were allocating as packages.
So that's part of why there is a greater level of confidence-
Around that $200 million because NASCs
all have their budgets.
We've had visibility on how they're tracking against their budget,
as well as the two uplifts of 14% and 10% that I told you
about. So that's why there was confidence in being able to
carry the funds forward.
And just that's in the context of $200 million of underspend in the
context of a billion dollars of additional money.
So $800 million was spent.
Yes.
But $200 million wasn't.
Thank you for the clarification, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Supplementary, no. Supplementary, Marama David.
Thank you. Ano, kia ora, Minister. I'm not in the room.
I'm somewhere else right now.
Doing my best. Minister, so just to
the gentleman to your left or to my left, I guess your right, you
referred to Tai Tokerau in a sample of the flexible
funding scenario. And then Minister, you just referred to Kaitaia in Auckland,
which are all the places in which I love-
... and are all about. So what I did want to understand
better is in terms of whaikaha Māori.
Not only in the flexible funding space, but just
across, how do we know, how will we know,
what are the measures specific to Whānau Māori,
whaikaha Māori through the DSS?
Are there specific priorities and
measures for Whānau Māori?
Well, I think first and foremost, the assessment process
and the plan that I talked about is for each individual-
Yeah
... and their whānau. And so we're not predetermining what
that plan is, but it'll also be based on what their needs
are and what support is available in the
area.
Is there anything you want to add to that, Al?
Yeah, absolutely. We know that
Māori have a higher
rate of disability within the population.
Mm.
They also access disability support services at a higher rate, and so really
important for us that we're able to provide
different kinds of services that can meet that need.
That's why flexible funding was so important.
We also know that Māori are accessing DSS
increasingly. So over the last year to two years, we have seen the
number of Māori accessing disability support services increase.
But lack of services can't fully be ameliorated by just
informal supports and flexible funding.
There does actually need to be service provision.
We've recently taken on
a Māori commissioning lead to look at exactly that.
I think last time we were in front of this committee, we talked about
Māori providers. That's one part of it, but delivering services to Māori is
obviously an important part. So we've got dedicated resource and
function now within DSS to drive exactly that kind of change.
So the by Māori for Māori is a thing?
That's a thing in your mind?
Yes, we absolutely.
And again, I think last time we had this conversation, we
mentioned that lack of data was important, that we needed to understand
who our kaupapa Māori providers were.
We now have a better view of that, and that's something that we can now focus on to
grow and improve services for Māori.
New question, Dana.
Thank you. Well, it is a new question, but it's also related to NASCs.
So
it was good to see in Budget 2025
more funding to help the NASCs to do their work.
In my area, we do have issues around assessments
and timeliness of that, and people don't actually know how to
get some help in that space. So I'm interested to know
what measures are in place to ensure that timely NASC assessments are
completed, given that that has clearly been a focus.
And what work is being done on
providing access to them
more readily because it's hard enough for
people ordinarily without some of the challenges that the people in the
whaikaha community encounter.
Yeah. So the comment I made earlier in the presentation around
the system is still far too complicated.
Mm.
So part of the strengthening work and listening to the community is
how do we simplify it, and what are the things we focus on first.
I've got some very aspirational views around that, but I won't share them with you
just yet.
Need to crawl before we can walk and before we can run.
In terms of the NASCs, I said there was a significant amount of change that
they're going through at the moment.
Yeah.
All moving to a consistent assessment has been challenging.
And so part of supporting them through this
period of change and transition was surge funding.
Yeah.
So that recognized
they were doing their normal work, but also a significant
period of change to assist with that.
I don't know if we have data in terms of where there are
slower or longer periods for assessments in NASCs.
Do we have that?
Yes, we monitor that on a monthly basis through our new budget management
framework for NASC. So the contract managers meet once a month with
NASCs, and they rate them all on their performance and timeliness.
Mm.
We were seeing an increase in timeliness measures, not to the performance
standards within the estimates
through till, I think, around December.
We can provide that information to the committee.
That would be good.
There has been a slight dip, but that was to be expected as we rolled out the new
assessment model. As with any change, it's
taken them a little bit of time to get used to.
So that's dipped a little bit, not a lot, in the last couple of months, but
we're hoping that'll be back on track by June, and we are having really
strong conversations in a contractual management sense with them about improving
their performance. As the minister said, that increase in funding was
targeted directly at improving their timeliness and access to
assessments.
Mm. So that regular monitoring of
performance was not in place two years ago.
Yeah. That's right.
So that in itself is a significant change and a significant
improvement.
The other things that I have said to NASCs and providers when I've met
them is
to make sure that with DSS, we continue to have an open
conversation while we're navigating this change.
So, we do want to make sure that we are continually
improving it.
Mm-hmm.
And while things might not be working
as intended, if we keep the dialogue and conversations open
between DSS providers and NASCs, that will allow
us to make those improvements faster, which is all part of the strengthening
work that we're underway with.
Mm-hmm. So am I correct in assuming that that surge funding
will come to an end, it's time limited?
Yes.
But that there is a percentage increase after
that to continue-
Mm-hmm
... to fund the extra work needed.
Correct.
Yes. Okay.
Yeah.
Right.
Correct.
Thank you.
Supplementary, Brockie.
Thanks.
On that note, CCS Disability has said quite publicly
that they're hearing from their members that wait
times for assessment has increased
quite a bit, and for equipment as well, and
that declines have increased from NASCs as well.
So, my question was whether that is being monitored, what
is the trend, and can you share that information for both?
Yes, we can, and I think it'll highlight the trends.
Yeah. Thank you.
Supplementary, Karangi.
Yeah, just wanting to
understand
around the DSS and the minister's opening statements.
You talked about extensive
consultation with the disability community and-
Yes. Right
... thank you
to
some of the organizations like EGL for their support, and I just wanted to
clarify that their support was actually for the disability
strategy, not for the DSS bill. Could you just confirm that?
Yeah, absolutely. So
all throughout the time I've been the minister, the biggest challenge
is lack of consistency, lack of transparency,
no sustainability, postcode lottery, unfair.
And so what was very concerning to me
when I became the minister was to find out that there was no authorizing
legislation.
And if you think about all of those concerns that people have raised the whole
time-
Mm-hmm
... the foundations that we're doing with the first part of the
DSS bill sort that.
So-
Yeah
... what is the purpose of DSS?
Who was it for, and actually setting up the
foundations for that next piece of
strengthening. So if you think about what comes next when we talk
about ministerial programs,
that then puts
on the record
clear, transparent, simple,
what is it? So if you think about residential pricing, the new
model that we put in place, that would then become a
ministerial program, which is gazetted, goes to
cabinet, is approved, and everybody can see it.
And then another example of a ministerial program will be
the carer support package that we're working on at pace.
So what have we heard from carers?
They feel undervalued. They feel underpaid.
They worry about what will happen as they get older and their ability for
their adult disabled child to be looked after.
So the components of the carer support package clearly is
what is the financial assistance,
what does respite look like,
what other sorts of support might they require.
And one of the really, really big ones for me is making sure that we
are planning well enough in advance
for their adult disabled child. What does a transition look like-
Mm-hmm
... so that they are comfortable when their
early 20s or late 20s child moves
into a flat. And I was in some of these
flats on Friday.
Mm-hmm.
And then they can be parents
as opposed to being the full-time carer.
But those are big transitions, and we need to build in sufficient time
to plan for that. And so I think around the sustainability,
then it makes it easier for a carer who's a family member to kind of
know and plan for that.
What these ministerial programs will mean, and
the bill allows a three-year transition.
So we will need all of these ministerial programs to be done in the
three-year period.
Any change, significant change by a minister or a chief
executive will not be possible
when the ministerial programs are in place
on top of the DSS bill.
So what do people say? They want consistency. They want certainty.
They want sustainability. They want it to be clear, and they want it to be
transparent. So yes, it's going to take us a little bit of time to get
there,
but it will be much, much better at the end of it, because
previously it could be a note in a cabinet paper.
It could be a letter
from a minister to a chief executive,
and significant changes were made.
That is not good enough, and that is why we are making these
changes.
Thank you. And so I just have one more supplementary
around
the
Well, you've talked about the feedback, and there is no question that disabled
people have been asking for a framework for the DSS model
for a really long time. So that is
great work. In that feedback that you received with
the strategy,
was there feedback around
carers not being considered as Crown employees?
Because what I've heard is around budget blowouts, which I
always
sort of go, "Oh," because if that's the price of dignity for
disabled people, then I think that's just the price of it.
We were just talking about how 54% of the
vote goes to superannuation, and no one's arguing that the dignity
of elderly people should be compromised.
So my question is around,
in that extensive feedback that you talked about, was anyone
concerned about,
was that one of the key concerns of people that carers would be
considered Crown employees?
Yeah. So,
as I said before, the feedback that has come through from carers
over a very long time is they feel undervalued, underpaid,
and that their care is unsustainable.
And that is what we are focusing on with the carer support package.
And still maintaining choice and control.
At the end of the day, the choice of who the carer is should sit with the
disabled person,
and we should ensure that there are sufficient transitions over time.
Where the Supreme Court decision came in,
the whole way DSS is set up,
was it was never intended
that DSS be an employer of family
carers. Was never the intention.
And part of not having underpinning legislation
then exposes the Crown to risk
that a Supreme Court makes a decision about
who is an employee and who isn't, and actually that you can
be an employee without an employment contract, for example, which happens all
the time-
Oh, wait. We don't have enough time. New question, Priyanka.
But the other thing I just do want to say,
our investment with 2.1 billion over two
budgets is saying very clearly we
understand the need for greater level of investment.
But taxpayers quite rightly have an expectation that
the agency responsible for the funding knows where the money
is going, who it is going to, what is the
performance of the organization that is receiving the
funding, and that it is planned, managed, and controlled.
So I don't want
that assertion left on the table that we as a government are
not investing in disabled people.
We are, and we have significantly.
$2.9 billion this year is the largest there has ever
been in DSS. But you cannot have any
organization anywhere across the Crown
that spends at will without any controls in place.
Last question, Priyanka.
Thank you.
Minister, no one disagrees with codifying DSS funding into
legislation. It was on the cards for the previous government as well.
However, the issue is the amount of detail in the secondary leg,
and also the fact that this bill, as it's drafted,
reduces legal protections and autonomy for disabled people.
Can you explain-
Well, I reject that
... how that is consistent with the UNCRPD
that New Zealand ratified in 2008?
The accompanying documentation to the bill points out the lack
of consultation prior to or through the development of the
bill, possibly it says, "May be seen as
inconsistent with the obligations of the UNCRPD," and that's just one
part of it.
Yeah. Well, I reject your assertion outright.
In terms of ministerial programs,
I have said very clearly that there will be no ministerial program while I'm
the minister that is not consulted on.
Other ministers, other governments may have a different view.
But this does need to be done. It is critically important, and I will
say again, once these ministerial programs are in place,
no minister and no chief executive will be able to make significant
change without it being gazetted and without Cabinet approval.
Yeah.
Thank you, Minister, and thank you to your officials.
Thank you to Anne, Justine, and Alyssa.
Also, thank you to Ellen and Laura online for interpreting.
Appreciate it.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Thank you